Bandwidth is calculated as (upper Bollinger Band minus lower Bollinger Band) divided by middle Bollinger Band.  
With default parameters of a 20‑period look back and plus/minus two standard deviations, bandwidth equals four times the 20‑period coefficient of variation.  
% b is used for system building and pattern recognition.  
Bandwidth is used to identify opportunities arising from relative extremes in volatility and for trend identification.  
Some traders buy when price touches the lower Bollinger Band and exit when price touches the moving average in the center of the bands.  
Other traders buy when price breaks above the upper Bollinger Band or sell when price falls below the lower Bollinger Band.  
Options traders, especially implied‑volatility traders, often sell options when Bollinger Bands are historically far apart or buy options when Bollinger Bands are historically close together, expecting volatility to revert toward the stock’s average historical volatility.  
When Bollinger Bands lie close together, it indicates a period of low volatility.  
When Bollinger Bands expand, it indicates an increase in price action or market volatility.  
When Bollinger Bands have only a slight slope and track approximately parallel for an extended time, price generally oscillates between the bands as though in a channel.  
Traders often combine Bollinger Bands with other indicators to confirm price action.  
Coupling oscillator‑like Bollinger Bands with non‑oscillator indicators such as chart patterns or trendlines can increase trader conviction that the bands are predicting correct price action relative to market volatility.  
Studies of Bollinger Band strategy effectiveness have produced mixed results.  
A 2007 study by Lento et al. found no evidence that Bollinger Band strategies consistently outperform a standard buy‑and‑hold approach over a decade of data from 1995 onward.  
The same 2007 study found that a simple reversal of the Bollinger Band strategy (“contrarian Bollinger Band”) produced positive returns in various markets.  
Another study found significant positive returns on buy trades generated by the contrarian moving‑average crossover rule, the channel breakout rule, and the Bollinger Band trading rule in the Chinese market after accounting for transaction costs.