To factor out the effect of a changing number of issues on the McClellan Oscillator, the daily breadth number (A‑D) is divided by the total advances plus declines (A + D) to obtain a ratio.  
The ratio is multiplied by 1000 to bring it back into a normal range, effectively assuming exactly 1000 stocks traded on the exchange.  
Ratio‑Adjusted A‑D is calculated as (A‑D) / (A + D) × 1000.  
After obtaining the ratio‑adjusted value, the EMA calculations and the Ratio‑Adjusted McClellan Oscillator are performed the same way as for the standard version.  
The Summation Index is calculated by adding each day’s Oscillator value to a running total of all previous Oscillator values.  
The Summation Index changes each day by the value of the Oscillator; prolonged positive or negative Oscillator values produce an extended Summation Index.  
When the DJIA trends upward, the Oscillator is typically positive and the Summation Index rises.  
When the Summation Index reaches a high value, it normally falls back as the market consolidates, setting up the market for the next leg of the move.  
Early work showed the Summation Index had a total amplitude of about 2000 points.  
The original developers artificially adjusted the Summation Index upward by 1000 points so its neutral level would be +1000, causing it to oscillate between 0 and +2000 under normal conditions.  
The +1000 neutral level for the normal McClellan Summation Index remains the standard today.  
The increase in the number of issues traded on the NYSE has led to larger amplitudes of both the Oscillator and the Summation Index.  
To adjust for this, one can either subjectively factor chart amplitude changes or computationally use Ratio‑Adjusted values for the Oscillator and Summation Index.  
The Ratio‑Adjusted Summation Index (RASI) is calculated as a running total of all previous Oscillator values, but using Ratio‑Adjusted Oscillator values.  
For the Ratio‑Adjusted Summation Index, zero is used as the neutral value instead of the artificial +1000 level used for the conventional Oscillator.