Bollinger Bands are a type of statistical chart that characterizes the prices and volatility over time of a financial instrument or commodity, introduced by John Bollinger in the 1980s.  
Financial traders use Bollinger Bands as a systematic tool to inform trading decisions, control automated trading systems, and perform technical analysis.  
Bollinger Bands display a graphical envelope of moving averages (similar to Keltner or Donchian channels) and volatility expressed by the width of the envelope in a two‑dimensional chart.  
Two user‑chosen input parameters determine how the chart summarizes historical price data, allowing the response of the chart to vary with the magnitude and frequency of price changes.  
Bollinger Bands consist of an N‑period moving average, an upper band at K times the N‑period standard deviation above the moving average (MA + Kσ), and a lower band at K times the N‑period standard deviation below the moving average (MA − Kσ).  
Typical default values for the parameters are N = 20 days and K = 2.  
The default moving average is a simple moving average, though other averages such as exponential moving averages are commonly used.  
Usually the same period is used for both the middle band and the calculation of standard deviation.  
Bollinger registered the term “Bollinger Bands” as a U.S. trademark in 2011.  
The purpose of Bollinger Bands is to provide a relative definition of high and low prices in a market.  
By definition, prices are considered high when they reach the upper band and low when they reach the lower band.  
This definition aids rigorous pattern recognition and helps compare price action to indicator action for systematic trading decisions.  
BBImpulse measures price change as a function of the Bollinger Bands.  
Percent bandwidth (%b) normalizes the width of the Bollinger Bands over time.  
Bandwidth delta quantifies the change in the width of the Bollinger Bands.  
% b equals 1 at the upper band and 0 at the lower band, calculated as (last − lowerBB) / (upperBB − lowerBB).  
Bandwidth is calculated as (upperBB − lowerBB) / middleBB.  
With the default parameters of a 20‑period look‑back and ±2 standard deviations, bandwidth equals four times the 20‑period coefficient of variation.