If prices stay up when volume subsides for a number of days, the move is considered “good.”  
If the market holds its own on negative‑volume days after advancing on positive‑volume days, the market is in a strong position.  
The Positive Volume Index (PVI) is called the “majority” curve.  
Dysart distinguished between the actions of the “majority” and those of the “minority.”  
The majority tends to emulate the minority, but its timing is not as sharp as that of the minority.  
When the majority shows an appetite for stocks, the PVI is usually “into new high ground,” as in 1961.  
The two indicators assume that “smart” money trades on quiet (low‑volume) days and the crowd trades on very active days.  
The Negative Volume Index (NVI) picks out days when volume is lower than the previous day.  
The Positive Volume Index (PVI) picks out days when volume is higher than the previous day.  
Whenever the NVI rises above a prior high while the DJIA is trending up, it gives a “Bull Market Signal.”  
When the NVI falls below a prior low while the DJIA is trending down, it gives a “Bear Market Signal.”  
The PVI is interpreted in reverse of the NVI.  
Signals are most authentic when the NVI has moved sideways for a number of months in a relatively narrow range.  
There is no mathematical system devoid of judgment that will continuously work without error in the stock market.  
Between 1946 and 1967, the NVI rendered 17 significant signals, of which 14 proved correct (average gain of 4.32% from the final high or low) and 3 proved wrong (average loss of 6.33%).  
The NVI seriously erred in 1963‑1964 and in 1968.  
In 1969 Dysart reduced the weight given to the NVI because it was no longer a decisive indicator of the primary trend, though it retained an excellent ability to give leading indications of short‑term trend reversals.  
A probable reason for the NVI losing efficacy during the mid‑1960s was the steadily higher NYSE daily volume caused by a dramatic increase in the number of issues traded, leading to price rises on declining volume.  
The NVI topped out in 1955 and trended down until at least 1968, although the DJIA moved higher during that period.  
Norman G. Fosback attributed the long‑term increase in the number of issues traded as a reason for a downward bias in a cumulative advance‑decline line.