A top preceded by an RSI value below 70 indicates the top is less significant and may signal either a higher top forming or a weakening long‑term uptrend.  
A pennant formation on the RSI line that breaks out indicates an intermediate price move in the direction of the breakout.  
A significant breakout of a long‑term pennant on the RSI line should indicate the next long‑term trend.  
Failure swings in an index are most significant after the RSI reaches a high near 70 or a low near 30.  
When the RSI reaches 70, the immediate down swing can fall to around 58.  
An up swing composed of several small swings is not unusual as long as the high and low of the main swing are not penetrated.  
Penetration of the low point (e.g., 58) completes the failure swing.  
On August 15 the failure swing carried the RSI up to 41.  
After several small down swings, the RSI point was penetrated on the up side on August 26.  
Trend lines on a bar chart often appear as support lines on the RSI.  
Support lines formed by low swing points on the RSI can be used to confirm trend lines drawn on the price chart.  
A break of a trend line on November 4 was not confirmed by the RSI support line.  
Divergence does not occur at every turning point but does occur at most significant turning points.  
Divergence appearing after a strong directional move is a very strong indication that a turning point is near.  
Divergence is the single most indicative characteristic of the Relative Strength Index.  
The top on November 9 was indicated by an RSI value above 70 and divergence, and was confirmed by a failure swing, a pennant breakout, and a support‑line break.  
The Relative Strength Index, when used with a bar chart, provides a new dimension of interpretation for chart readers.  
No single tool, method, or system can produce correct answers 100 % of the time in trading.  
A successful trader uses several different inputs to make decisions.  
The Relative Strength Index can be a valuable input in a trader’s decision‑making process.