The Coppock curve or Coppock indicator is a technical analysis indicator for long-term stock market investors created by E.S.C. Coppock, first published in Barron's Magazine on October 15, 1962.  
The indicator is designed for use on a monthly time scale.  
It is the sum of a 14‑month rate of change and an 11‑month rate of change, smoothed by a 10‑period weighted moving average.  
The formula is Coppock = WMA[10] of (ROC[14] + ROC[11]).  
Coppock, the founder of Trendex Research, was an economist who was asked by the Episcopal Church to identify buying opportunities for long-term investors.  
He used the typical mourning period of 11 to 14 months as the basis for the indicator’s calculation.  
A buy signal is generated when the indicator is below zero and turns upwards from a trough.  
No sell signals are generated by the original design of the indicator.  
The indicator is trend‑following and based on averages, so it does not pick a market bottom but shows when a rally has become established.  
Coppock designed the indicator for the S&P 500 index, and it has been applied to similar stock indexes such as the Dow Jones Industrial Average.  
The indicator is not regarded as well‑suited to commodity markets because bottoms there are more rounded than the spike lows found in stocks.  
Although designed for monthly use, a daily calculation can be made by converting the periods to 294‑day and 231‑day rate‑of‑change intervals and using a 210‑day weighted moving average.  
A variant used by the Investors Chronicle includes sell signals but cautions that they may be merely dips in a continuing bull market.  
Jerry Samet has successfully used the Coppock indicator with weekly close data instead of monthly close data.  
The indicator greatly helps define intermediate‑term market moves lasting 6 weeks to 12 months.  
Mike Scott found that a weekly Coppock buy signal occurring within ±2 weeks of an IBD Follow‑Through Day correctly identifies rallies 79 % of the time in bull markets and 45 % of the time in bear markets.