The first resistance on the upside of the market is calculated by adding the lower width of the prior trading range to the pivot point price.  
The first support on the downside is the width of the upper part of the prior trading range below the pivot point.  
R1 equals P plus (P minus L), which simplifies to 2 × P minus L.  
S1 equals P minus (H minus P), which simplifies to 2 × P minus H.  
These first support and resistance levels can be calculated by subtracting the previous low (L) and high (H) from twice the pivot point value, respectively.  
The second resistance level (R2) is calculated as the pivot point plus the full width of the prior trading range (H − L).  
The second support level (S2) is calculated as the pivot point minus the full width of the prior trading range (H − L).  
A third resistance level (R3) is calculated by adding twice the range (P − L) to the prior high, equivalently R1 plus (H − L).  
A third support level (S3) is calculated by subtracting twice the range (H − P) from the prior low, equivalently S1 minus (H − L).  
A fourth set of support and resistance levels can be calculated by using three times the trading range, though this is rarely done.  
The second and higher support and resistance levels are always located symmetrically around the pivot point.  
The first support and resistance levels are not symmetric around the pivot point unless the pivot point divides the prior trading range exactly in half.  
The pivot point itself represents the level of highest resistance or support, depending on the overall market condition.  
In a directionless market, prices may fluctuate greatly around the pivot point until a breakout occurs.  
Trading above the pivot point indicates bullish market sentiment, while trading below the pivot point indicates bearish sentiment.  
The pivot point is a leading indicator that provides advanced signaling of potential new market highs or lows within a given time frame.  
Support and resistance levels derived from the pivot point and prior market width are commonly used as exit points for trades but are rarely used as entry signals.  
When an up‑trending market breaks through the pivot point, the first resistance level is often a good target to close a position because the probability of resistance and reversal increases greatly.  
Many traders consider the halfway points between any two support or resistance levels as additional, weaker support or resistance areas.  
Mid‑point pivots between the main pivot points have no standard label format unlike the support and resistance labels.  
Mid‑point labels commonly start with the letter “M” followed by a symbol or number.  
The midpoint between the pivot point and R1 can be designated as M+, and the midpoint between R1 and R2 as M++.  
The midpoints below the pivot point are labeled M− and M−−.  
Using a numeric format from 0 to 5, the midpoints are labeled M0 between S3 and S2 up to M5 between R2 and R3.