An investment of $1,000 in the stock market in July 1932 would have grown to about $5,000 by March 1937, excluding dividends.  
The primary factor in trading stocks is timing—when to buy and sell.  
The next most important factor in trading stocks is the choice of stocks to trade.  
Price fluctuations of any security are much larger than its annual dividend income.  
Determining the amount of investment and protecting it against price fluctuations is the paramount factor.  
During bull markets, the 55 standard statistical indexes form tops at different times, resembling a fan.  
Bull markets consist of five primary waves lasting about two years.  
In bull markets, several groups of indexes move uniformly, driven by a powerful cyclical force.  
The duration of a bear market is generally longer than the duration of the preceding bull market.  
During the sharp decline from 1929 to 1932, both the best and inferior stocks and bonds were forced to be sold regardless of their true value.  
Many traders mistakenly believe that all bear‑market declines can repeat with the same parameters.  
Studies indicate that many years will pass before another deep bear‑market fall can be expected.  
The final bottom of bear markets occurs simultaneously with the lowest levels in almost all index groups, opposite to bull‑market highs.  
During bull markets, superiority among stocks is less pronounced, especially during long rallies.  
During bear periods, the overall market and several groups become more sensitive to current events and external factors.  
Many traders develop prejudice against individual stocks because of prior bad experiences.  
Such prejudice can prevent traders from finding a group of stocks that is free from flaws.  
Stocks that are sluggishly traded should be avoided because the wave pattern does not form.  
Confidential information from well‑wishers usually concerns thinly traded or cheap stocks; it is advisable to trade only widely traded stocks.  
The stock life cycle has three stages: a juvenile stage where stocks should be avoided, and a creative stage where stocks have flourished and are an excellent medium to trade.