The average directional movement index (ADX) was developed in 1978 by J. Welles Wilder as an indicator of trend strength in a series of prices of a financial instrument.  
ADX has become a widely used indicator for technical analysts and is provided as a standard in collections of indicators offered by various trading platforms.  
The ADX is a combination of two other indicators developed by Wilder, the positive directional indicator (+DI) and the negative directional indicator (‑DI).  
To calculate +DI and ‑DI, price data consisting of high, low, and closing prices each period (typically each day) is needed.  
UpMove is calculated as today’s high minus yesterday’s high and DownMove as yesterday’s low minus today’s low; if UpMove > DownMove and UpMove > 0 then +DM = UpMove else +DM = 0; if DownMove > UpMove and DownMove > 0 then ‑DM = DownMove else ‑DM = 0.  
After selecting the number of periods (Wilder used 14 days originally), +DI = 100 × (smoothed moving average of +DM) ÷ average true range and ‑DI = 100 × (smoothed moving average of ‑DM) ÷ average true range.  
ADX = 100 × (smoothed moving average of the absolute value of (+DI − ‑DI)) ÷ (+DI + ‑DI).  
Variations of the ADX calculation typically involve using different types of moving averages, such as an exponential, weighted, or adaptive moving average.  
ADX does not indicate trend direction or momentum, only trend strength.  
ADX is a lagging indicator; a trend must have established itself before the ADX generates a signal that a trend is underway.  
ADX values range between 0 and 100.  
Generally, ADX readings below 20 indicate trend weakness, and readings above 40 indicate trend strength.  
Readings above 50 indicate an extremely strong trend.  
ADX has been shown to be a reliable coincident indicator of classical chart‑pattern development, with readings below 20 occurring just prior to pattern breakouts.  
The value of the ADX is proportional to the slope of the trend.  
The slope of the ADX line is proportional to the acceleration of price movement (changing trend slope).  
If a trend has a constant slope, the ADX value tends to flatten out.  
According to Alexander Elder, a buy signal occurs when ADX turns up while below both directional lines and +DI is above ‑DI, and a sell signal occurs when ADX turns back down.