Author: Ralph Nelson Elliott
Title: Natures Law - The Secret of The Universe
Year: 1946
No truth has found greater universal acceptance than that the universe is governed by law. It is obvious that without law there would be chaos, and where there is chaos, there is nothing. Navigation, chemistry, aeronautics, architecture, radio transmission, surgery, music - no doubt the full range of arts and sciences - everything, interacting with animate and inanimate objects, obeys the law, because nature herself acts in the same way. Since the distinguishing feature of the law is precisely the established order or constancy, it follows that everything that happens will be repeated and can be predicted if we know this law.  
Columbus, who claimed the earth was round, predicted that a westward course from Europe might eventually bring his ships to land, and despite the scoffers even among his own crew, he saw his prediction come true. Galei, having calculated the orbit of his comet in 1682, predicted its return, which was remarkably confirmed in 1759. Marconi, after studying the transmission of electrical vibrations, predicted that sound could be transmitted wirelessly, and today we can sit at home and listen to music and other programs from across the ocean. These people, as well as countless others in various fields, studied the pattern. After its publication, the forecast was a matter of technology, as it became mathematical.  
Even when we do not understand the underlying cause of a particular phenomenon, we can predict, based on observations, that the phenomenon will recur. Day after day for many thousands of years people waited for the sun to rise at the appointed time before the reason for this result was known. The Indians associated the beginning of their months with each new moon, but even today they cannot say why regular intervals are the hallmark of this heavenly sign. The spring planting of seeds is proof of the cyclical nature of the world, as summer is expected to be the next season; but how many farmers understand why they are afforded such constancy of the seasons? In each example given, the rhythm of a particular phenomenon was used.  
Man is a natural object no less than the Sun or the Moon, and his activity, expressed in the language of numbers, is also the subject of analysis. Human activity, though striking in its essence, when viewed from the point of view of rhythmic processes, contains an accurate and understandable answer to some of our most stupefying problems. Moreover, since a person is a participant in the rhythmic process, the predictions made in connection with his activities can extend far into the future with justification and reliability previously unattainable.  
A very far-reaching study in the field that falls under the definition of human activity has shown that practically the entire course of development, which is the result of our socio-economic activity, follows a certain law that causes the results to repeat themselves in the form of similar and invariably recurrent sequences of a certain set of waves or impulses - the established form. Moreover, it showed that these waves or impulses in their depth carry a stable relationship with each other and over time. To demonstrate and explain this phenomenon in the best possible way, it is necessary to take some example from the field of human activity, which will provide a lot of reliable data, and for this purpose there is nothing better than the stock exchange.  
Particular attention was paid to the stock market for two reasons. Firstly, there is no other field in which forecasting has been attempted with such great intensity and with such little result. Economists, statisticians, technicians, rulers and bankers have all attempted to predict the future of New York Stock Exchange prices. Undoubtedly, a certain field of activity has appeared, aimed at predicting the market. Although 1929 has come and gone, the reversal from the largest bull market known to the largest bear market known took almost all investors by surprise. For leading investment firms that spend hundreds of thousands of dollars annually on market research, this was a surprise, and they suffered millions of dollars in losses due to stock price drops held for too long.  
The second reason for choosing the stock market as a demonstration of the wave impulses common to any socio-economic activity is the large profit that accompanies a successful market forecast. Even an occasional success in a single market forecast will pay off with slightly less than fabulous wealth. For example, in the market move from July 1932 to March 1937, the average rise of thirty leading and exemplary stocks was 337%. However, during this five-year move, there were individual stocks whose percentage gains were much higher. Finally, the overall growth mentioned above is not the result of a straight-line move, but a series of up and down steps or zigzags lasting several months. These smaller moves present an even bigger profit opportunity.  
Despite the attention given to the stock market, the success both in the accuracy of predictions and, moreover, in the attendant rewards, was inevitably accidental, because those who tried to work with market movements failed to realize the extent to which the market is a psychological phenomenon. They did not understand the fact that there is a pattern underlying the fluctuations of the market, or, in other words, price movements are the result of rhythms or an ordered sequence. Thus, those with some experience in the matter are well aware that market predictions lack the validity or significance of any sort other than random.  
But the market has its own law, just like other entities in the universe. If there were no law, then there would be no axis around which prices could circulate, and, consequently, there would be no market. Instead, there would be daily sequences of spontaneous, erratic price fluctuations with no cause or apparent order. However, as will be shown later, careful market research proves that this is not the case. Rhythmic, systematized, adjusted and harmonious movements will be highlighted. This unknown law of the market can only be discovered when the market is viewed from an appropriate angle and then analyzed using this method. Just imagine that the stock market is a human creation and therefore reflects human characteristics. In the following pages this law or rhythm to which man obeys will be revealed as the movements of the market, changing according to a certain wave principle.  
The wave law is a phenomenon that has always functioned in every branch of human activity. Waves of different levels (degrees) developed regardless of whether there was a mechanism for their registration. When a similar mechanism, described in the line below, was available, the wave patterns would emerge and become visible to the trained eye.  
A. Extensive commercial activities represented by corporations whose ownership is widespread (covering the general population*).  
B. A general market where the buyer and seller can interact quickly through their representatives.  
C. Reliable recording and publication of transactions.  
D. Availability of relevant statistics on all matters relating to corporations.  
E. The extremes (high and low) of the daily range (prices*) charted in a way that will reveal all levels of waves as they form.  
Daily range (price*) recording of stock transactions was introduced in 1928, and hourly recording in 1932. All this is necessary to observe waves at minor and minute levels, especially in fast markets.  
Contrary to the doctrine of the Dow Theory, a popular method for evaluating stock market movements, "Law of Nature" does not require confirmation for two stock indices. Each index, group (stock*), stock or any other human activity is interpreted by its own waves.  
FOOTNOTE (hereinafter R. Prechter's comments)  
(1) Except for minor modifications, this introduction is in accordance with Chapter I of the Wave Principle.  
Chapter I. The Great Pyramid of Giza  
Many years ago I tried to figure out the meaning of the word "cycle", but no one could define it. Curiosity led to the study of charts and I discovered rhythm in change (prices*) (described in my work published in 1938 (The Law of Waves*)). Later I discovered that the basis of my discoveries was the law of nature known to the designers of the Great Pyramid of Giza, which was probably designed five thousand years ago.  
[Apparently, we are talking about the pyramid of Cheops, the first and largest pyramid on Earth, located in the Giza Valley, Egypt. Giza (Gizeh) - an area on the left bank of the Nile, almost opposite Cairo, famous for the field of pyramids. Here are the three largest pyramids (called the Great), belonging to the pharaohs Cheops, Khafre and Menkaure, and several smaller pyramids. The construction of the Great Pyramids was completed in 2590, 2550, 2505 BC respectively, but the author speaks of only one of them.*]  
Several pyramids exist in Egypt and the rest of the world, but the Pyramid of Giza is the first of its kind and is the only one to display symbolic figures. The remaining pyramids were built later and served as a crypt for the bodies of kings and their families. Back in 820 BC. The Turkish caliph Al Mamoun mistakenly believed that the Giza pyramid hides the bodies of former pharaohs and that gold treasures could be found there. This confirms that even at that distant time, the symbolic figures of the pyramid at Giza were not known. The period of designing this pyramid took place not only before the emergence of literature, but also before the emergence of hieroglyphs (i.e. Egyptian writing*). On other pyramids outside the Giza Valley, hieroglyphs are already present.  
Enormous funds have been spent on the study of the pyramids in recent years.  
Chapter II. Law of nature  
The law of nature was known at least five thousand years ago. By about 1500 BC, Egypt, the oldest of the modern states, was in the prime of its powers. It is not known when the Egyptian pyramids were built. The Great Pyramid of Giza was designed at least five thousand years ago. Some scholars suggest that it existed before the threat of a worldwide flood that forced Noah to build the ark. Others believe that it may be thirty thousand years old.  
In Life magazine (December 3, 1945) there was an article called "Building the Great Pyramid." Mr. Bel Geddes prepared examples of different stages of construction and presented their sketches. The report was prepared for Encyclopedia Britannica. It says the total weight of the building materials used is 3,277,000 tons, while the materials used in the Empire State Building, the tallest building in the world, weigh only 305,000 tons.  
The amazing ingenuity, craftsmanship, time and labor expended by the designers and builders of these pyramids in erecting an eternal symbol demonstrate the greatest significance of the message that they wanted to convey to posterity. This was a historical period before the emergence of literature and hieroglyphs; therefore, symbolic numbers were the only means of recording.  
For centuries the Egyptian pyramids have been thoroughly studied, especially in recent years. As far as I understand, Egyptologists missed an important, perhaps the most important, symbol: the outer lines of the Giza pyramid.  
Pythagoras (Pythagoras) was a celebrated Greek philosopher of the fifth century BC. Old encyclopedias give a detailed description of his activities. Encyclopedia Britannica gives a diagram and a cryptic inscription that may be the only record he left. It was made upon his return to Greece after a long journey to Egypt. The diagram and the inscription (Secret of the Universe*) are shown in Figure 1. It is logical to assume that the Pythagorean diagram refers to the pyramid.  
The following initial dimensions of the Great Pyramid of Giza have been established: the base is 783.3 feet, the height is 484.4 feet, their ratio is 61.8%. A height of 484.4 feet equals 5,813 inches (5-8-13 Fib).  
Looking at the pyramid from one of its four sides, three lines are visible - a complete cycle. Looking at the pyramid from one of its four corners, five lines are visible. The pyramid has five surfaces - four above the ground and the base. From its top the pyramid opens eight lines.  
Fibonacci was an Italian mathematician of the thirteenth century AD. At that time he was better known as Leonardo de Pisa. He visited Egypt and Greece, and on his return to Italy he discovered what is now known as the arithmetic progression (the Fibonacci sequence*). The sequence is: 1 2 3 5 8 13 21 34 55 89 144 ...  
The sum of any two adjacent numbers is equal to the next number, for example 5 + 8 = 13. Any number divided by the next gives a ratio of 0.618, for example 8 / 13 = 0.618. Any number divided by the previous one gives the reciprocal of 1.618. For simplicity I will refer to the first value as 0.62 and the last as 1.62.  
The recently deceased Jay Hambidge, an American artist, traveled to Egypt, Greece and Italy and wrote several significant books. I will quote pages 27 and 28 of his book entitled *A Practical Application of Dynamic Symmetry*:  
"Botanists use the sunflower flower as one of the common illustrations of the law of leaf arrangement. It is a phenomenon especially in two-dimensional form. Seeds are distributed around the circle of the sunflower in diamond-shaped cells, and the combination of these cells forms a pattern of interesting curved lines, somewhat similar to an old carving sunflower.  
Firstly, the arcuate line itself is a curve of a certain kind; it is exactly like the growth line of a sea shell. It has a regular shape and certain mathematical properties, which are the necessary result of a single form of growth, as will now be shown.  
Secondly, if the arcuate lines are counted, then on an ordinary sunflower five or six inches in diameter, 89 such lines can be found: 55 twisting in one direction and 34 in the other. We write down two numbers 34 + 55. Below the topmost flower on the stem there are usually flowers of the second level, smaller in size; their intersecting lines number 21 + 34. Lower along the stem, third-level flowers have intersecting curves 13 + 21. In Oxford, England, cultivated sunflowers have increased from 34 + 55 to 55 + 89, and a giant specimen had 89 + 144 intersecting curves. In the classification of plants, many flower heads have intersecting lines corresponding to 5 + 8.  
If we start counting the actual number of leaves on the stem from the bottom up to the flower head, we find a constant number of leaves and trips around the stem between each pair of leaves directly above each other. These numbers follow the same sequence as shown by sunflowers and flowers: 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, 144, etc. Each member of this sequence is obtained by adding the two previous numbers.  
Dividing any two adjacent members, e.g., 55 / 34, yields a constant coefficient 1.618; the reverse operation 34 / 55 yields 0.618. The two results differ by one, and a slight error occurs because the sequence is not entirely accurate for integers.  
Through experience I have found that 144 is the largest number of practical value. In a complete cycle of the stock market, the number of Minor waves is 144, as shown in the table below and in Figure 7 (Ch 4).
Number of waves Bull market Bear market Total (complete cycle)  
Primary level 5 3 8  
Intermediate 21 13 34  
Secondary level 89 55 144  
All numbers belong to the Fibonacci series and the entire sequence is used. The wavelength may change, but not the number. Pay attention to the Fibo numbers in the following areas:  
- the human body follows the numbers 3 and 5. Five branches depart from the torso - the head, two arms and two legs. Each arm and leg is divided into three parts. The legs and arms end in five fingers. The fingers (except the big toe) are divided into three parts. We have five senses.  
- a monkey has the same structure as a person, except that its big toe is the same as on its hand. In most animals, five branches depart from the torso - a head and four paws, only five. In birds, five branches depart from the body - a head, two paws and two wings.  
- Music: the best example is the piano keyboard. "Octave" means eight. Each octave consists of eight white keys and five black keys, for a total of 13.  
- Chemical elements: there are about 89 basic elements.  
- Colors: there are three primary colors. Mixing them gives the rest of the colors.  
Various observations  
The Western Hemisphere consists of three regions: North, Central and South America. There are 21 republics in the Western Hemisphere, each of which is a member of the Pan-American Union. There are three countries in North America: Canada, Mexico and the United States. In South America there are many republics and three European colonies, 13 in total. In Central America (the former Panama Canal) there are five republics.  
The original United States consisted of 13 states. They are currently divided into 55 administrative divisions: 48 states, the District of Columbia, the Philippines, the Panama Canal Zone, Puerto Rico, Alaska, the Hawaiian Islands, and the Virgin Islands.  
The Declaration of Independence has 56 signatures. The original number is 55. The last one was added later.  
The main branches of the Federal Government: three.  
The largest salute in the Army: 21 guns.  
Voting age: 21 years.  
The Bill of Rights contains 13 clauses.  
National flag colors: three.  
The Axis countries consisted of three partners. Germany swallowed up 13 countries in rapid succession, but stalled at the fourteenth, Russia. Mussolini was dictator for 21 years.  
In 1852 Squadron Commander Perry made a courtesy visit to Japan and urged the "Son of Heaven" to break the absolute isolation. In 1907, 55 years later, Japan seriously threatened the United States. In 1941, 34 years later (and 89 years after 1852), Japan attacked Pearl Harbor.  
The Washington Monument in Washington, DC (the first stone was laid on July 4, 1848):  
- total cost $1,300,000 (13 Fibo)  
- height of the spire 500 ft (5 Fib)  
- height of the base 55 ft (55 Fib)  
- area of the base of the spire 55 sq ft (55 Fib)  
- top of the spire 34 ft (34 Fib)  
- foundation steps 8 (8 Fibo)  
- windows (two on each side) 8 (8 Fibo)  
Chapter III. Human activity  
The term "human activity" (1) includes such categories as stock and bond pricing, patents, the price of gold, population size, population migration from cities to the countryside and vice versa, commodity pricing, government spending, industrial production, life insurance, electricity generation, gasoline consumption, fire damage, stock-exchange membership costs, epidemics, and real-estate. The main category of interest to us is the price of shares.  
Prepare for a "black day". For long-term growth, for example, in areas such as construction of buildings, the preservation of residential complexes, roads, bridges, factories, houses, etc., a cyclical downturn is to be expected with low prices for both workers and employers.  
Fluctuations in economic well-being are inevitable like the rotation of the Earth.  
FOOTNOTE (1) See the charts in the last chapter of *The Wave Principle*.  
Chapter IV. Characteristic features of human activity  
All human activity has three characteristic features - shape (pattern), time and proportion - each of which adheres to the Fibonacci numerical sequence. Once the waves are recognizable, this knowledge can be applied to any movement, as the same rules apply to the prices of stocks, bonds, grain, cotton, coffee, and any other activity mentioned earlier.  
The most significant of these three factors is the shape (model, pattern). Some model is always in the process of formation. As a rule, but not always, the researcher can imagine in advance the appearance of the model. This possibility is provided by the type of the predecessor model. See Chapter 8 "Alternating".  
The ideal cycle chart for the stock market is shown in Figures 5, 6 and 7. Initially it is subdivided into a bull market and a bear market. Figure 5 subdivides a bull market into five waves of the Primary level (Major (1)) and a bear market into three waves of the Primary level (Major). The bull-market chart in Figure 6 subdivides the waves [1], [3] and [5] of the Primary level (Major) into five waves of the Intermediate level each. Figure 7 subdivides Intermediate waves 1, 3 and 5 into five Minor waves each.  
In Figure 5 the bear market is subdivided into three waves of the Primary level (Major), denoted by the letters [A], [B] and [C]. In Figure 6 down-waves [A] and [C] are subdivided into five waves of the Intermediate level. The ascending wave [B] is subdivided into three waves of the Intermediate level. In Figure 7 these Intermediate waves are subdivided into five Minor waves.  
In other words, a bear market is an inverted bull market, except that a bear market has three Major down-waves while a bull market has five Major up-waves. Corrections in both bullish and bearish areas are the most difficult to study.  
Since the discoveries described here have no analogues, it is necessary to introduce new terms. The expression "wave levels" ("degree") has a related meaning here. For example, the "Primary" level ("Major") is associated with the waves in Figure 5; the "Intermediate" level ("Intermediate") with the waves in Figure 6; the "Secondary" level ("Minor") with the waves shown in Figure 7.  
FOOTNOTE (1) The term "Major" is used by Elliott in the next few chapters as a substitute for the term "Primary", which was introduced in the first monograph.  
(2) Elliott improved the wave notation introduced in the first monograph.  
Chapter V. Corrections  
Regardless of direction and size, the correction patterns remain identical. Downward or sideways corrections are formed on the bullish part of the market; on the bearish area - ascending or sideways corrections. Therefore schematic drawings of corrections are presented for both bullish and bearish sections of the market. The schematic corrections shown first refer to rising market segments; subsequent charts refer to descending sections and are "flipped". Where the expression "inverted" occurs, it refers to a downtrend in the main trend.  
In Figures 5, 6 and 7 attention was paid to the fact that there are three levels of waves: Primary (Major), Intermediate (Intermediate) and Secondary (Minor). Naturally, there are also three levels of corrections.  
There are three types of corrections: zigzag (1), wave flat and triangle.  
The following illustrations show the wave planes of the Secondary (Minor), Intermediate (Intermediate) and Primary (Major) levels (Figures 14, 15 and 16) and inverted variants (Figures 17, 18 and 19). These schematic representations are called "plane" because their usual external shape is horizontal; at times they have a downward or upward slope.  
As a matter of fact, these models could be called "3-3-5". According to recent studies, they are three-wave patterns (A, B, C), while the bullish pattern (momentum) is a "5-3-5-3-5" pattern for waves 1-5.  
The human model is "5-3-5-3". Five protruding parts depart from the torso (head, two arms and two legs); arms and legs are divided into three parts; the ends of the arms and legs are divided into five fingers; each finger (except the big toe) is again divided into three parts.  
Whether wave C of the wave plane will be an extension or not, the pattern will remain corrective. However, whether an extension will form in wave C can be found out by carefully reading Chapter 8, "Alternations".  
Complex corrections  
Correction at the Secondary wave level (Minor) can consist of three waves (Figures 20-21).  
A sideways double correction can have seven waves (Figure 22). A sideways triple correction can have eleven waves (Figure 23).  
In other words, a sideways correction in an uptrend always ends in a down wave (2), whether it consists of one, three, seven or eleven waves. They are called: three waves - "single three", seven waves - "double three", eleven waves - "triple three".  
The same number of upward waves, as shown in Figures 24-26, is corrective. Sometimes these threes are heterogeneous in direction: ascending and lateral or descending and lateral (Figures 27-30).  
Triangles are made up of five waves (or five legs). In large patterns each segment consists of three waves (Figures 31-32). On medium-sized specimens the fourth and fifth legs may be one wave each (Figure 33). On small specimens the legs often consist of only one wave. The main reference point in the formation of a triangle is the generators - straight lines drawn through its vertices. You cannot be sure a triangle is forming until the fifth wave begins.  
Figure 34 shows three existing types of triangles. The fifth segment can end within or outside the triangle generators (Figures 35-36).  
FOOTNOTE (1) Figures 10 and 13 represent the "double zigzags" that Elliott discusses in Chapter 6. Either Elliott got the illustrations mixed up here, or he thought double zigzags were more common at the Primary level than normal zigzags. For an illustration of a true Primary-level zigzag, refer to section [A-B-C] of Figure 7 and Figure 27 of *The Wave Principle*.  
(2) In preparing Figures 27-28 Elliott omitted a statement; an additional "three" was unintentionally missed in each correction, so the subsequent movement cannot be a resumption of the trend that preceded the correction.  
(3) The same.  
(4) These illustrations represent ascending, descending and symmetrical (converging) triangles. For an unspecified reason Elliott did not include a description of the inverted symmetrical (divergent) view.  
(5) The fifth wave of the triangle may end outside the generators, but not beyond the top of the third wave.  
(6) See footnotes 1-8 to Chapter XI.  
(7) In addition they can be found at the site of wave B.  
Chapter VI. Extensions  
An extension can form in any one of the three impulses (waves 1, 3 or 5), but never in more than one (Charts 39-44). Note that in each example the total number of waves is nine if the extension is counted as five waves instead of one. In rare cases an extended move can consist of nine waves of equal size (Figures 45-46).  
Extensions are formed only in the new price territory of the current cycle; they are not formed as corrections.  
Elongation in extension  
The extensions "pass twice" along the price segment: the correction traverses the same segment twice - down and up. This feature is relevant only when the extension develops in the fifth wave. If an extension is formed in the first wave, a double pass can be seen in the performance of waves 2-3; if in the third wave, in waves 4-5; if in the fifth wave, see Figure 48.  
If the extension is formed at lower wave levels, the rollback occurs immediately. At Intermediate or Primary (Major) levels the double pass may not start until the entire up-move is complete. When the move is at high speed the same price area rolls back in the opposite direction at almost the same speed.  
Wrong markup  
The three impulse waves 1, 3 and 5 are rarely the same length. One of them is significantly longer than the other two. Wave 3 is never shorter than both waves 1 and 5. For example, if wave 3 is shorter than wave 1 or 5 (Figure 49), the correct counting is shown in Figure 50.  
Note that wave 4 should not enter the territory of wave 1. If wave 4 overlaps wave 1, the end of wave 4 is lower than the top of wave 1. Inverted examples are shown in Figures 51-52.  
The overlap in the "complex" wave structure requires careful study. Sometimes complex structures form "double threes" or "triple threes" (illustrated in Chapter 5).  
Scale-up corrections  
It is very important to plot daily values on the chart to know whether the first up-move consists of three or five waves. The weekly time frame may not reveal the exact structure of the first up-wave. For example, Figures 53-54 show an inverted wave flat on both daily and weekly charts. The weekly frame does not reveal the exact structure of the first up-wave, and a student may mistakenly assume it consisted of five waves on the daily chart. The weekly inverted wave plane may appear to have seven waves, even though its structure is A-B-(1-5)-C (Figure 53).  
A similar situation can happen with a zigzag. The zigzag does not lengthen, but it can "double" as it grows (Figures 56-57). Whether a zigzag is single or double, its corrective characteristics remain the same.  
Lateral movements  
All corrective movements, regardless of wave level, consist of three waves. Lateral movements follow the same demeanor and are also corrective. Figure 58 shows two types of sideways movements (following an uptrend); Figure 59 shows the main trend down.  
FOOTNOTE (1) Part of the extension in the first or third wave will be done twice, but not in the same manner as in the fifth wave. Only after the extension in the fifth wave does the pull-back reach the top of the second extension wave.  
(2) The wave level does not affect the models. This refers to the top of the extended wave flat, which was supposedly followed by a double pass, resulting from Elliott's unusual marking of the 1928-1930 period.  
(3) He means "shorter than wave 1 and shorter than wave 5".  
(4) The same.  
(5) These patterns are hardly a wave plane in appearance; the general contour suggests a double zigzag.  
(6) The first example in Figures 58-59 is a wave plane; the second simply shows the appearance of a certain wave plane on a larger time frame.  
Chapter VII. Vertices of a stretched wave plane  
A move that exceeds the top of the fifth wave (OT - orthodox top) is the top of the extended wave flat (Figure 60). Suppose the five up-waves in Figure 61 are at the Primary wave level. The top of the fifth wave can be an orthodox top (OT). The first down-move from top 5 is likely three waves long and could be labeled wave "A". The next move, likely up, may exceed the top of wave 5 and should be labeled "B". Like wave A, it can consist of three waves. The next move is likely a five-wave down-move and could be indicated by a "C" wave.  
Waves A, B and C together make up a single correction, even though the end of wave B may be higher than wave 5. A similar pattern was formed between November 1928 and July 1932.  
If wave A is a simple zigzag, then wave B can be an inverted flat. This is the case when the alternation rule gives a signal. "Alternating" is the topic of the next chapter.  
FOOTNOTE (1) This is simply the higher price value generated by wave B of the extended wave flat. (2) See footnote (5) to chapter IV of the Wave Principle  
Chapter VIII. Alternation  
According to the dictionary, alternation is "the appearance or effect of two objects or a series of objects in turn." Alternation is a law of nature. For example, leaves or branches appear first on one side of the stem and then on the opposite side, changing their position. The structure of the human body follows the rule: 5-3-5-3-5. An endless list of examples could be given, but the topic of this chapter is the nature of alternation behavior in the realm of human activity.  
Bull and bear markets alternate. A bull market has five waves, while a bear market has three. Thus, five and three alternate. The same rule applies to all wave levels.  
A bullish move consists of five waves. Waves 1, 3 and 5 are ascending. Waves 2 and 4 are descending or sideways. Thus, odd numbers alternate with even ones.  
Waves 2 and 4 are corrective. Patterns alternate in these two waves. If wave 2 is "simple", then wave 4 can be "complex" and vice versa. A "simple" correction at lower wave levels consists of a single downward wave. "Complex" consists of three downward or side waves. See figures 62 and 63.  
At higher wave levels, in long bull and bear markets, corrective waves are correspondingly larger and preparing for the final decline is often very tiring. First there is a more or less significant downward movement, which I label with a capital A. This is followed by an upward wave, labeled wave B. The third and final downward movement is wave C. Wave A can be a zigzag. In this case, wave B can be an inverted wave plane. If wave A is a wave flat, then wave B can be an inverted zigzag. (Wave C will, in any case, consist of five waves down. It can be powerful and may reach the starting point of the previous bull market.) Thus, waves A and B alternate.  
The thirteen-year triangle shows another example of alternation. From November 1928 to March 31, 1938, a wave plane was formed. (1) From March 31, 1938 to October 1939, an inverted zigzag. From October 1939 to May 1942, a wave plane was formed. (2) The top of an extended wave flat is one of the cases where wave B exceeds the top of the fifth wave of the previous bull market, as explained in Chapter 7. Even here there is alternation. The top of 1916 was the top of the extended wave plane, that of 1919 was the usual top, that of 1929 was the top of the extended wave plane, and that of 1937 was the usual top.  
Up until 1906, the Dow's railroad index outperformed the DJIA Industrial Index. For 34 years (Fibo) from 1906 to 1940, the Dow Industrial Index led the upward movement. Since 1940, the railway index has again been in the lead.  
FOOTNOTE (1) See footnotes (4) and (5) to Chapter XI of the Law of Nature. (2) This leg is actually a "five" or contains part of a triangle in wave B followed by a five-wave C. Or the marking completes A-B-C since 1937. See Footnote 8 to Chapter XI of the Wave Law.  
Chapter IX. Scales  
The use of either semi-logarithmic or arithmetic scales exclusively as a widespread habit is an erroneous practice and deprives the researcher of the advantage and dignity of these scales. An arithmetic scale should always be used until a logarithmic one is required. During an upward five-wave move, a semi-logarithmic scale is required when the price moves above the parallel line.  
Wave [1] of the triangle from 1928 to 1932 consists of waves [A], [B], [C]. Wave [A] consists of three down waves from November to December 1928. They were fast, so they are only visible on the daily time frame. Wave [B] in the form of an inverted wave flat forms the top of an extended wave flat of a higher level. Wave [C], lasting 34 months, consists of five downward waves from September 1929 to July 1932 (indicated by numbers on the chart).  
Wave [2] of the triangle from 1932 to 1937 is a typical bullish pattern as it consists of five waves. However, due to its unusual size, it can be identified as a very large inverted wave flat as it forms part of a corrective pattern. Wave [2] lasted 5 years.  
Wave [3] of the triangle was a descending five-wave and lasted 13 months. Therefore, waves [1], [2] and [3] of the triangle from November 1928 to March 1938 constitute the wave plane. Wave [4] of the triangle from 1938 to 1939 is an inverted zigzag. Wave [5] of the triangle from 1939 to April 1942 is a wave flat. (8) She fell down long enough; its excessive length was simply necessary to coincide with the total period of 13 years from 1928 and 21 years from July 1921.  
FOOTNOTE (1) Elliott's difficulty in explaining this material lies almost entirely in the concept of a thirteen-year triangle. While the individual characteristics of the 1928-1942 period are fascinating, and while this approach helped Elliott identify the major bottom of 1942, the concept of the thirteen-year triangle as such is invalid. The main difficulty is that the rise of 1932-1937 is a "five" and the fall of 1937-1938 is a "five", thus limiting the consideration of them as sub-waves of the triangle, since all sub-waves of the triangle must be "threes". The most compelling argument for the formation of the triangle was the sequence of 0.618 retracements within perfect converging lines, a very uncanny coincidence indeed. Despite this, the phenomenon has developed due to various waves (as it was in 1976-1979), and they alone are not enough to assert the formation of a true triangle.  
(2) Although these turning points are not a coincidence, referring them to the "double pass" rule, at least as it is stated in theory, seems "far-fetched". The 1921-1928 wave 5 extension was taken twice, as required, by waves A and B in the Elliott pattern, and then by waves 1 of C and 2 of C. 
(3) True. This is the most dramatic bull market in US history in terms of percentage growth.  
(4) Elliott describes the first three waves together as a wave flat, since the third wave of the triangle is undeniably a "five".  
(5) Elliott breaks his own rule. If the 1937-1938 move is the "C" wave of the wave plane, then it must be a "five". If it is a triangle wave, then it must be a "three". He should not have identified this movement in two different ways.  
(6) Absolutely accurate. You may notice that Elliott's labeling in figures 72 and 74 does not fit his suggestion of a triangle, but corresponds to the correct interpretation of the wave pattern.  
(7) Frost and I discussed this error in our book. It is possible to count a certain five-wave movement as a "three", but only in favor of the Wave Principle and what we call "correct appearance". Wave planes are so called because they are flat. Wave B flat always goes deep into wave A territory. In a five-wave movement, there is no wave overlap by definition; therefore, the rise of 1932-1937 should be classified as a "five".  
(8) Again, wave planes are flat and should not "fall". In reality, this is a five-wave drop without any overlap, completing the zigzag that began in 1937. To mark this area correctly, put 1 where Elliott has "a", 2 where he has "b", 3 in place [A], 4 in place [B], and 5 in place [C]. A slightly better layout includes a horizontal triangle as the [B] wave.  
(9) Moreover, it goes beyond the top of the third wave of the triangle, which it should not do.  
Chapter XII. Breakthrough  
The term "inflation" is defined in the dictionary as "spreading beyond natural boundaries". A single section of the bull market will not violate the natural boundaries. The sequence of such sections, one above the other, can go "beyond the natural boundaries". A single bull market section is generally not "above another" unless it alternates with unusual bear markets (shallow retracements).  
In the twenties, a breakout was formed due to unusual bear markets (1). During this period, there were three regular bull markets and two unusual bear markets, totaling five. Breakout warnings occurred in the following order: regular wave 1, unusual wave 2, regular wave 3, unusual wave 4, and wave 5 breaking through the parallel line on the arithmetic scale (see Figure 65, Chapter 9).  
Figure 75 shows a typical bull market and a typical bearish correction (waves a, b, and c) that pulled back deep after the baseline was broken. Figure 76 shows an unusual bearish correction that barely broke through the baseline.  
Figure 77 is a graph of the Dow Index (DJIA) from 1921 to November 1928 on an arithmetic scale. Wave 5 breaks the parallel line. The fact that the parallel line has been broken requires conversion of the entire graph since 1921 to a logarithmic scale. Figure 78 shows the same index (monthly time frame) on a logarithmic scale. Wave 5 touches but does not break the parallel line.  
There are three ways to determine ahead of time where the breakout will end: the method described above (using a logarithmic scale), the wave ratio (shown in Figure 71), and the time factor (shown in Figure 71).  
FOOTNOTE (1) Elliott uses a literal definition of inflation, not a monetary one (which we are used to). According to his definition, "breakthrough" ("inflation") is formed on markets that are experiencing an acceleration in the ratio of price takeoff per unit of time. See footnote (1) to chapter IX. [I have allowed this term to be translated as "breakthrough", which most accurately conveys its meaning in this context.]  
Chapter XIII. The Price of Gold  
The price of gold is another example of how important it is to distinguish between the merits of arithmetic and logarithmic scales. The chart covers one section of the bull market from 1250 to 1939, almost seven centuries. In Figure 79, wave [2] is a simple pattern, while wave [4] is a complex one. Pay attention to the letters [A], [B] and [C] of wave [4]. In Figure 79, drawn using an arithmetic scale, the price movement is above the parallel line; therefore, a semi-logarithmic scale is required, as shown in Figure 80. The parallel line on the logarithmic scale indicates the breakthrough endpoint (on the graph) of any human activity.  
(1) When a five-wave rally completes within a channel on a linear scale, there is no breakout. The gradual growth of wave [1] in Figure 79 indicates that the market price of gold during this period was "free", i.e., not fixed by any authority. Subsequently, the advance was spasmodic and the corrections were sideways, indicating that the price was set by some regulatory body, presumably political. Corrections could move sideways, down, or down and sideways, as seen in wave [4] in Figure 79.  
Under the rule described here, when the pattern is completed by wave [5] touching the parallel line as shown in logarithmic chart 80, there will be no further price advance until the price breaks the baseline at some point. Therefore, there is a possibility that the current price of gold at 168 shillings will remain stable at least until it touches the baseline around 2300, at the point where the dotted line crosses on the right side of the chart. (2)  
FOOTNOTE (1) True if it is done using correctly chosen wave tops. (2) Some people have made a career of ridiculing Elliott for this conclusion. Perhaps he should have avoided commenting on such a sketchy background. Undoubtedly, he should have been less categorical and described alternative options. Despite this, there is no problem for the Wave Principle or its application in practice, since the break of the upper parallel line immediately implies the continuation of the development of an extended third wave.
Chapter XIV. Patents  
The expression "human activity" includes any activity, not only the stock market, but also industrial production, life insurance, the migration of people from cities to the countryside and vice versa, and so on. Various examples are presented in Chapter 3. Quite unusual examples are sometimes found, for example, the registration of patents, which are human activities, but without emotional overtones. (1) Figure 81 is the filing of patent applications from 1850 to 1942. Notice the five waves. The fifth wave lengthened from 1900 to 1929. The Dow Index (DJIA) has followed this same pattern for almost the same period of time (see Chart 82). Note that the "correction" in patent filings from 1929 to 1942 consists of three waves A, B, and C. Stocks followed the same pattern during the same period, except that from 1928 to 1942 the "correction" was a triangle instead of waves A, B and C. A long time ago, farming was the main occupation. Here and there, the farmer could have a shop or the production of certain goods in addition to the main activity. Production was a piece-by-piece production of goods at home. The natural resources, climate, zeitgeist, and democracy in the United States required the creation of corporations for individual financial initiative. The inventions and introduction of machinery gradually changed everything. The Louisiana Purchase, the conquest of California, the annexation of Texas and Oregon, together with the establishment of borders with Mexico and Canada, added a very significant territory. Zeitgeist was (and still is) a major asset. This is demonstrated by a timeline of patent applications from 1850 to 1942. Please note that the shape of this chart is the same as the shape of the stock market chart. The United States is very different from any other country in a vital way: our ancestors come from all parts of the world. They were not satisfied with the tyranny and political regime of their homeland, and they came here in order to enjoy freedom and develop their personality.  
FOOTNOTE  
(1) The Wave Law reflects more than just emotional phenomena, because it is also a historical document of the development of man, demonstrably marked up in the form of separate wave patterns based on his (Human*) collective emotional rhythm. It does not even require proof that the mood expressed by such an index is the cause of progress; apparently, man can produce more and invent more when such a prevailing mood is looking "up" and not "down."  
Chapter XV. Technical features  
Movement [on the chart*] in only one area of human activity is rarely, if ever, a reliable guide to others. Figure 83 is a graph of three indices - the London Industrials, the Dow-Jones Industrials, and the manufacturing of goods in the United States. All graphs reflect the period from 1928 to January 1943. Goods production schedule provided by Cleveland Trust Company. The Dow Jones average chart shows a five-wave triangle from November 1928 (orthodox top) to April 1942. The ratio of the amplitude of each triangle wave to the previous one, starting from the second, is approximately 61.8%. The presence of a triangle is confirmed by its generating lines, time relationships, the structure of each wave, a single coefficient of the ratio of waves to the previous wave. The high-speed breakthrough from 1921 to 1929 (8 years) was followed by a wave-like pattern.  
Important events that disrupted the pattern include: the outbreak of wars in 1937-1939, the September 1, 1939 declaration of war (which caused a sharp market rise), and the subsequent technical position of the market cycle (wave pattern*) at those times.  
FOOTNOTE  
(1) Because prices are expressed in 1/8 and 1/4 instead of decimals.  
Chapter XVI. Working with charts  
Students (wave analysis*) may benefit from detailed suggestions which I have found essential. Sample charts are shown in Figure 87. (The hourly chart is represented by a solid line at the closing price of the hour*) Accurate observation of lower-level waves requires data on the daily range of price changes. The publication of high and low values per day (high-low range) was introduced by Dow and Jones in 1928. Chart sizes recommended for highlighting price fluctuations are a quarter inch vertically for one point of the Industrial Average, half an inch vertically for one point of the Rail Average, and half an inch vertically for one point of the Utility Average. This distribution of space on the graph makes it easier to interpret. The quarter-inch scale is divided into five parts, eliminating guesswork about the exact drawing of daily and hourly bars. It is also important to maintain the distance between daily bars; do not leave extra space for weekends and holidays. Exactly the same scale and forms are recommended for hourly charts - a quarter inch of the horizontal axis for a five-hour session, or one minimum division per hour. The daily bar should be plotted at the end of the last hour of each session. All recommendations are presented in Figure 87.  
FOOTNOTE  
(1) Because prices are expressed in 1/8 and 1/4 instead of decimals.  
Chapter XVI. Timing of investment  
The definition of time is one of the main points in the universe. We divide the annual interval into seasons: spring, summer, autumn and winter. We recognize daytime as a period for business activity, and night as a period for relaxation and rest. When it comes to investing, timing is the most important thing. What to buy is important, but when to buy is even more important. The investment markets themselves are gradually predicting their own future. Waves show the next market movement based on their models, whose beginning and end are sensitive to accurate and evidence-based analysis. The law of nature includes the most important of all elements - the definition of time. The law of nature is not a system or method of playing in the market, but a phenomenon that acts as a marking of the course of development of all human activity. Its application to forecasting is revolutionary.  
If someone invested $1,000 in long-term government bonds in January 1932 and sold them in June 1939, the total profit over the 89-month period would be $5,000 (including interest and bond appreciation). In January 1932 the yield on government bonds was 4%; in June 1939 it was only 2%. As far as the stock market is concerned, an investment of $1,000 in July 1932 would have increased to about $5,000 by March 1937, excluding dividends. This statement is based on the percentage change of popular indexes.  
Chapter XVII. Choosing an investment instrument  
Chapter 19 shows that the primary factor in trading stocks is timing - when to buy and sell. The next most important factor is the choice of stocks to trade. To understand the securities selected for trading (stocks or bonds), first remember the following basic provisions.  
Price fluctuations and dividends  
Fluctuations in market prices of any security are much higher than its annual income in the form of dividends. Therefore, the paramount factor is the determination of the amount of investment and its protection depending on price fluctuations.  
Tops of bull markets  
During bull markets, each group of a list of 55 standard statistical indexes shows the formation of tops at different times, like a fan. Bull markets form five primary waves over about two years. (1) During such a period several groups move in a very uniform manner, pushed forward by a powerful cyclical force.  
Bear markets  
As a rule, the duration of the bear market is longer than the duration of the previous bull market. (2) During the sharp decline from 1929 to 1932 the best stocks and bonds, as well as inferior ones, were forced to be disposed of regardless of their true value. Many traders mistakenly think all bear-market falls can repeat with the same parameters. (3) Studies show many years will pass before such a deep fall can be expected.  
It is striking that the final bottom of bear markets is formed simultaneously with the lowest marks in almost all groups of indices - the exact opposite of bull-market highs. During bull markets, superiority is less pronounced, especially for long rallies. During bear periods both the market as a whole and several groups become more sensitive to current events and external factors.  
Previous trading experience  
Many traders become prejudiced against individual stocks because of prior bad experiences. Following this tradition, the trader may eventually be unable to find a group of stocks that is free from flaws.  
Weakly traded stocks  
Stocks that are sometimes or often sluggishly traded should be avoided; the wave pattern is not formed.  
Confidential information  
Confidential information from well-wishers usually refers to thinly traded or cheap stocks. It is advisable to trade only stocks that are widely traded.  
Stock age  
The stock life cycle is divided into three stages. The first is the juvenile or inexperienced stage, during which such stocks should be avoided as they have not been sufficiently tested by the market. The second is the creative stage; stocks in this category have flourished significantly and are an excellent medium to trade, assuming they have been thoroughly tested by the market. The third or adult stage represents the period of full bloom; dividends can be consistently reliable and price fluctuations minimal.  
Brief summary. When a credible index wave pattern favors a move, follow these guidelines:  
1) Choose a group of stocks that move in unison with the index.  
2) Then choose the stocks (within this group*) that mostly follow the movements of this group.  
3) Always choose stocks that consistently trade well, have an average price, and are proven leaders.  
4) Diversify your funds, i.e., invest approximately the same amount in five to ten stocks, but no more than one of the group (for example, General Motors, United Aircraft, U.S. Rubber, U.S. Steel, New York Central and Consolidated Edison).  
FOOTNOTE  
(1) A bull market is any rise in prices that consists of the required five waves. Defining a "bull market" or "bear market" in terms of duration or percentage change in prices is quite arbitrary.  
(2) This footnote contained an unintentional typo. Bear markets are almost always shorter than bull markets and tend to 61.8% if they last a long duration of the bull market (see Chapter 4 in The Elliott Wave Principle, Key to Market Action).  
(3) The same expectations prevail in our time. With the financial crashes of 1969-1970 and 1973-1974 past, most now expect an "immediate repeat" [crash*] at the low end of another four-year cycle. Few can imagine the possibility of a less "oversold" bottom, despite the fact that the wave pattern suggests just that, as Elliott put it, "many years will pass before such a deep drop can be expected."
Chapter XXI. Symbolic numbers of the pyramid and how they were discovered
With permission from the Landone Foundation, I will quote three paragraphs from pages 134-135 of Mr. Landone's book: Prophecies of Melchi-Zedik:  
"The circumference drawn around the base of the Pyramid is 36524.22 inches. This is exactly 100 times more than 365.2422, the number of days in a solar year.
The design height of the Pyramid is 5813.02 inches.
These mysterious sages formulated a system of measurements of number, time, weight and length, squares and cubes of length. Since all these formulations are based on the length of the side of a square, since this length was obtained from a circle whose circumference corresponded to the days of the solar year, and since the time of the revolution of the Earth around the sun is invariable, these mystics created a single system of measurements forever accurate and eternally unchanged. (one)  
Determining the circumference around the base of the Great Pyramid at Giza, the researchers were looking for some known fact connected with it. In this example, it was the number of days in a year up to the last decimal place. In other words, these two facts are related and thus determine the purpose of this symbolic figure, based on which predictions can be made.
I discovered rhythm in human activity, and later learned that it is symbolically displayed in the Great Pyramid. Egyptologists failed to recognize this symbolic number, because they did not know the rhythm in nature and human activity. It is described in chapters 1 and 2 and illustrated in chapters 8-14.  
My contribution to the symbolic figures of the pyramid:
Opening patterns, levels and number of waves.
Combining the Fibonacci number sequence, Hambidge's discoveries in applying this sequence to art and botany, and the mysterious Pythagorean diagram.
Diagrams of the Great Pyramid from different angles.
The connection of the Fibonacci ratio and the height of the pyramid - 5813 inches (which consists of the three main numbers of the arithmetic Fibonacci progression: 5, 8 and 13) - to the base of the pyramid.
The manifestation of this arithmetic sequence in many areas of human activity.  
Ratio meter
Draftsmen use a tool called a proportional divider compass. The lever point is made movable so that any ratio can be obtained. Such tools are quite expensive and are currently practically unavailable. However, I have developed a convenient substitute for determining (without math) whether the ratio of amplitude or time is 61.8%. Willing to ship with postage paid.  
R. Elliott
No. 63 Wall Street
New York (5) NY  
FOOTNOTE (1) For additional material on this topic, see Peter Thompkins, Secrets of the Great Pyramid (Harper & Row, 1971).  
Chapter XXII. Law of motion
Dictionary definitions of the word "cycle" are different: "time interval", "full revolution or circle", "repeating pattern".  
The Earth rotates on its axis once every 24 hours; the Earth rotates around the sun once every 365.25 days.  
The word "cycle" also appears in many natural and economic contexts.  
The Earth rotates, the sun's rays heat the surface of the ocean, causing the water to evaporate. Air currents carry vapor until they meet cold layers of air over hills and mountains, which in turn condense the vapor.  
The number of days in a year up to the last decimal place is used as a reference point for many of the calculations presented in this chapter.  
FOOTNOTE (1) Elliott frequently used the term "circle" to refer to a cycle on stock charts.  
Chapter XXIII. Depression (1)
The concept of "depression" is applied to geography as well as economics. The Grand Canyon of Colorado is called a "depression" because it lies below the prevailing surface for many miles in any direction. The same terminology is sometimes used to describe prolonged market downturns.  
FOOTNOTE (1) The author uses the term "depression" in a non-technical sense; this should not be confused with the medical condition.  
Chapter XXIII. Depression (2)
Some writers describe the 13-year triangle of the DJIA (1928-1942) as a "throw" that always exceeds the top of wave 3. This description is repeated throughout the book.  
FOOTNOTE (1) The author originally contained several paragraphs that clearly referred to earlier sections of the book. Evidently, Elliott considered additional directions after most of the manuscript was completed and printed. These paragraphs have been moved to the appropriate places in the text.  
Chapter XXIII. Miscellaneous (1)
Wave trading volume
During a rise, the volume of wave 5 does not exceed the volume of wave 3; sometimes it is less. As long as volume increases, the next rise is formed, and so on until a new rise is registered without an increase in volume. See Figure 95. Also note that wave 2 volume is smaller than wave 1 volume. This is a handy indicator. (2)  
Circles
The word "cycle" means circle. Sometimes this property shows up on stock charts. The circle in Figure 96 is divided into four segments A, B, C and D. When the chart forms a downward rounding in segment C, the pattern is complete because the number of waves suggests that one or more three-wave formations may occur by the end of the downward movement. An accelerated ascent then follows in segment D. The overall pattern of ascent and descent resembles the combined segments C and D, i.e., the lower half of the circle.  
The many strikes at the end of 1945 are simply a swing of the pendulum from left to right, from 1 to 2 and then to 3, as shown in Figure 96.  
"Foot A-B"
The bottom of A-B (3), shown in Figure 53 of Chapter 6, sometimes consists of double or even triple triplets, as described in Chapter 5. This is especially true when the rounding bottom is formed.  
FOOTNOTE (1) This chapter originally contained several paragraphs that clearly referred to earlier sections of the book. Evidently, Elliott considered additional directions after most of the manuscript was completed and printed. The paragraphs have been moved to the appropriate places in the text. (2) That is, it shows that wave 2 is really forming, and wave 3 will follow it. (3) The bottom of A-B is suitable for describing the first two waves of the extended wave plane.  
Chapter XXVII. Bull Market 1942-1945
The thirteen-year triangle of the DJIA from 1928 to April 1942 is shown in Figure 71. As shown in Figures 31, 32, 37 and 38 of Chapter 5, the triangle is followed by a roll (prices). Figure 97 shows the DJIA index. Each vertical bar reflects the range of price changes in one month.  
Wave [1] of the Primary level is short. Wave [3] of the Primary level is longer, and its Intermediate waves are labeled a, b, c, d and e. Notice the baseline through the tops of waves b and d. Wave [4] of the Primary level consists of three Intermediate waves, denoted by letters a, b and c from July to November 1943. Wave [5] of the Primary level formed from November 1943 to December 10, 1945. Waves A and B lasted five months. (1) On the daily and weekly timeframes for this period (bottom of A-B), all waves consist of three sub-waves each (see Figure 53).  
From the letter B to the number 1, wave 1 of the Intermediate level formed, since it consists of five daily sub-waves. Wave 3 of the Intermediate level consists of five sub-waves, labeled a, b, c, d and e (extended). Extensions never appear in more than one sub-wave of impulse 1, 3 and 5 (see Figures 39-44). Wave 4 of the Intermediate level is the same as wave 2. Wave 5 of the Intermediate level consists of five weekly sub-waves and reached 196.59 in 1945, December 10. The price moved slightly beyond the parallel line. After December 10, 1945, the top of the extended wave flat (2) reached 207.49 on February 04, 1946.  
The waveform [5] of the Primary level from November 1943 to December 1945 was unusual because it formed close to the baseline from November 1943 to August 1945, instead of heading straight for the parallel line. The anomaly was caused by a new batch of reckless speculators who had more money than experience and preferred cheap stocks over proven securities. To work around this, I created a Special Index, which behaved as usual; see the bottom of Figure 97. Note that wave [5] of the Primary level does not cling to the baseline but is formed in a straight line from beginning to end.  
Note: In the top chart of Figure 97, the DJIA formed its "OT" (orthodox top) at 196.59 on December 10, 1945. Wave B, the top of an extended wave plane, is currently being formed. Wave C should follow (see Chapter 7).  
Expect an unusually weak bear market as shown in Figure 76, Chapter 12.  
Overview and Conclusion
Figure 71 shows a thirteen-year triangle from 1928 to 1942. It can be seen, with reference to Chapter 5, that (in momentum) triangles always form as wave 4, and wave 5 exceeds the top of wave 3.  
(Returning to the endless dispute with individual representatives of the wavers about the possible place of the triangle in the models of the senior level, let me quote here the pioneer of this theory, R.N. Elliott: "...triangles have always appeared as wave 4...")  
Figure 98 is a chart of the market from 1800 to December 1945. (1) Wave [1] from 1800 to 1857 is based on the history of commercial activity, since data on the stock market were not available until 1857. November 1928 is the orthodox top of wave [3] with which this triangle began (wave [4]). After the end of the triangle in April 1942, the "throw" began (wave [5]). The "throw" always exceeds the top of wave [3], which in this case was formed in November 1928.  
The move from 1921 to November 1928 consisted of three bull markets and two unusually shallow bear markets in between. So far, in December 1945, there has been only one bull market. Therefore, it would be logical if the shape and duration of the waves after 1942 were similar to the movement from 1921 to 1928, i.e., three bull markets and two intermediate shallow bear markets. (The author draws an analogy between the two fifth waves of an impulse.)  
This segment of the DJIA began in 1921 at 64 and ended in November 1928 at 299 with a 235-point advance. Our roll began in April 1942 at 93. 93 plus 235 equals 328, or 29 points above the high of November 1928, the top of wave [3]. (2) This roll may last eight years, ending in 1950, similar to 1921-1929.  
There is another approach in comparison with the schedule of 1921-1928. During the period 1921-1928, the first wave was a normal bull market with no signs of a breakout (see Chapter 12). The fifth wave, ending in November 1928, was undeniably a breakthrough. At present, the first wave, from 1942 to 1945, shows signs of a breakthrough.  
The graphs shown on the previous pages give an idea of the main historical outlines (commercial and industrial activities) of the United States. The US development is unusual for many reasons:  
    Geographic location, outline and boundaries: an area bounded on two sides by vast oceans and friendly neighbors.  
    Latitude and climate: semi-tropical, conducive to agriculture.  
    Natural resources: gold, iron, coal, oil, timber and waterways.  
    Zeitgeist and individual initiative: the number and value of patents from 1850 to 1929 is incredible (see Chapter 14). The patent application schedule (Figure 81) coincides with stock market waves in both time and form, reflecting business activity and mass psychology.  
    Democratic ideals: the form of government encourages individual initiative. This does not mean that perfection has been achieved, but suggests that we are on the right track.
FOOTNOTE (1) I repeat: with extremely limited data, Elliott accurately reproduces the waves of the main wave level from the late 1700s, just as he did in his notes in 1941 and 1942. In addition, his forecast for new values above the 1929 mark is also correct. However, in Figure 98 he indicated a short time span ending in 1950, which is disproportionately small compared to the previous four waves. It seems that even with a cursory analysis of the chart, the terminal top is assumed to be much further than 1950 and much higher than 328 DJIA. The problem, again, is the thirteen-year Elliott triangle, because the throws following the triangle are swift and short. The chart Elliott presented in his Explanatory Letter dated August 1941 and again in the Training Bulletin for October 1942 shows a more accurate start date of the cycle of 1776 and a more appropriate design end date of 2012.  
(2) These calculations are based on the principle that, as a rule, the fifth wave following a horizontal triangle is approximately equal to the widest part of that triangle.